- `abstract` - a [[Function (computer programming)|method]] with no [[Method body (object-oriented programming)|definition]] must be declared abstract and the [[Class (computer programming)|class]] containing it must also be declared abstract. abstract classes cannot be [[Instance (computer programming)|instantiated]]. abstract methods must be implemented in the sub classes.
- `assert` - describes a [[Predicate (mathematical logic)|predicate]] ([[Boolean|boolean statement]]) placed in a [[Java]] [[Computer program|program]] that a developer believes will always [[Return statement|return]] true. if something happens and the predicate ends up being false at run time, it will throw an assertion error and terminate the execution.
- `boolean` - defines a [[Boolean|boolean]] [[Variable (computer science)|variable]] which can only take on the values of "true" or "false" only. by default, the value of a boolean [[Primitive data type|primitive type]] is false. this keyword is also used to declare a method returns a value of the primitive type `boolean`.
- `break` - used to end the execution in the current [[Loop (computer science)|loop body]]; also used to break out of a `switch` [[Switch statement|block]].
- `byte` - this keyword is used to declare a [[Field (computer science)|field]] that can hold an [[Bit|8-bit]] [[Signed|signed]] [[Two's complement|two's complement]] [[Integer (data type)|integer]]. it is also used to declare a method returns a value of the primitive type `byte`.
- `case` - a statement in the `switch` block can be labeled with one or more `case` or `default` labels. the `switch` statement evaluates its expression, then executes all statements that follow the matching `case` label; see `switch`.
- `catch` - used in conjunction with a `try` block and an optional `finally` block. the statements in the `catch` block specify what to do if a specific type of exception is thrown by the `try` block.
- `char` - defines a character variable capable of holding any character of the source file's character set.
- `class` - a type that defines the implementation of a particular kind of [[Object (computer science)|object]]. a [[Class (computer programming)|class]] definition defines [[Instance (computer programming)|instance]] and [[Instance variable|class fields]], methods, and [[Inner class|inner classes]] as well as specifying the [[Interface (computer science)|interfaces]] the class implements and the immediate [[Superclass (computer programming)|superclass]] of the class.
- `continue` - used to resume program execution at the end of the current loop body. if followed by a label, continue resumes execution at the end of the enclosing labeled loop body.
- `default` - can optionally be used in a switch statement to label a block of statements to b executed if no `case` matches the specified value. alternatively, the `default` keyword can also be used to declare default values in a [[Java annotation]]. the `default` keyword can also be used to allow an interface to provide an implementation of a method.
- `do` - used in conjunction with `while` to create a [[Do while loop|do-while loop]], which executes a block of statements associated with the loop and then tests a boolean expression associated with the `while`. if the expression evaluates to `true`, the block is executed again; this continues until the expression evaluates to `false`.
- `double` - see: [[Double (data type)|double (data type)]]
- `else` - used in conjunction with `if` to create an [[Conditional (computer programming)|if-else statement]], which tests a [[Boolean expression|boolean expression]]; if the expression evaluates to `true`, the block of statements associated with the `if` are evaluated; if `false`, the block of statements associated with the `else` are executed.
- `enum` - used to declare an [[Enumerated type|enumerated type]].